.. Dark documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Sat Sep 19 14:14:37 2020.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

A chronology of *Dark*
======================

This page constitutes my best effort to create a definitive chronology
of the Netflix series *Dark*.  The series is quite complicated, and
the chain of cause and effect is sometimes not very clear.  There may
therefore be errors.  In case you find any, I would be much obliged if
you could point them out or even correct them over at `Github`_.

.. warning::
   I will be spoiling the events of *Dark* liberally.  No attempts
   will be made to shelter people who have not viewed the series in
   its entirety.


The three worlds
----------------

The events of *Dark* take place over multiple times, and in multiple
worlds.  For the most part, the events of *Dark* take place in
World A.  Only in the last episode of season 2 is the existence of
another world hinted at: World B.  Most of season 3 is devoted to
exploring the interconnected nature of worlds A and B.  The relevance
of a third world: world Z, is only brought up in the last two
episodes, and it is in this world the cause for everything is found,
and where the resolution of *Dark* takes place.

On November 8, 1971, two young adults (Marek and Sonja) and their
daughter Charlotte, die in an automobile accident on a bridge outside
the fictional town of Winden, Germany.  This so devastates Marek's
father, the Winden clockmaker H. G. Tannhaus, that he devotes himself
to the construction of a time machine that will bring them back.  As
is frequently said in the series: you can bring back the dead, so long
as you get to them before they die.

Tannhaus begins construction of his device in a local bunker in 1974.
The project takes twelve years, and he finally activates the machine
on June 21, 1986.  Unfortunately it does not work as expected.  It
splits the world Z into two “twin” or “mirror” worlds A and B, with
their own cris-crossed chronologies which do not necessarily align
with that of world Z.  In other words: the history of worlds A and B
are subtly different, both before *and* after the time of activation
of Tannhaus’ device.


The nature of time travel
-------------------------

In worlds A and B, it is possible to travel through time.  This is
enabled by a special substance sometimes referred to in the show as
the *God particle*.  The nuclear plant accidents in world A and B,
which happens at the same time as Tannhaus activates his device in
world Z, creates a significant amount of it.  This is what is inside
the yellow barrels, and it is also what makes up the swirling black
vortices that we see in several different times and places.

To time travel using the God particle mass, it needs to be controlled
in some way using an electromagnetic device.  This is the purpose of
the large installations found in the headquarters of Sic Mundus and
Erit Lux, and in the devastated site of the nuclear power plant in the
far future of Winden in world A.

Further, we see two modes of portable time travel in the show.  One is
a machine, built by Tannhaus in world A and most frequently used by
the middle-aged :ref:`Jonas <jonas>`, the middle-aged and elderly
Claudia, as well as the kids (Bartosz et al).  It is operated with a
phone, but also needs a small amount of God particle mass to function.

The other mode of transport is an orb-like device whose origins are
not known to us, but it is presumably more advanced than Tannhaus’
machine, since it also allows travel between worlds.  Like everything
else, it needs God particles to function, but it appears that it
doesn’t need a phone.  Perhaps it has a built-in source of
electromagnetic radiation.

Finally, it is possible to travel through time using a tunnel hidden
deep within the caves of Winden.  This does not need any extra
equipment or fuel: you just need to crawl through it, although it is
the least flexible way of transport since it only allows travel to
very specific times, and even then it is not always open.

Although *Dark* is very complicated, it is simplified significantly by
the fact that time travel almost always happens in intervals of 33
years.  The tunnel and Tannhaus’ machine both seem to observe this
rule exactly.  The orb, which allows cross-world travel also seems to
allow time travel in arbitrary intervals.  The large swirling vortices
of God particles in the headquarters of the two secret societies also
seems to enable more flexible travel.  Mostly, when not otherwise made
clear, I will assume that time travel happens in 33 year intervals.


Organic and artificial characters
---------------------------------

When worlds A and B were brought into existence, along with them came
a number of characters who were not present in the original world Z.
These characters make up most of the main cast of the show, and they
are the main sources of all the misery that takes place.  In general,
nobody in Winden lives a happy life.

These characters, which for lack of a better world I will call
“artificial” characters, can be distinguished from “organic”
characters in that time travel is somehow necessary for them to exist.
The artificial characters are:

- The nameless man, who is the son of Martha and Jonas.
- Tronte, who is the son of Agnes and the nameless man.
- Ulrich and Mads, who are children of Tronte.
- Martha, Magnus and Mikkel, who are children of Ulrich.
- Charlotte, who is the daughter of Noah and Elisabeth.
- Elisabeth and Franziska, who are the children of Charlotte.
- :ref:`Jonas <jonas>`, who is the son of Mikkel.
- :ref:`Silja <silja>`, who is the product of :ref:`Hannah <hannah>`’s time travel.
- Agnes and Noah, who are the children of Silja.

In particular, Martha, Jonas, the nameless man, Tronte, Ulrich, Mads,
Magnus, Mikkel, Charlotte and Elisabeth are all descended from
themselves, and could clearly not exist in a world without time
travel.  A point could be made that Silja is organic, since she is the
daughter of Hannah and Egon, who are both also organic.  In this case
the same would apply to her children: Noah and Agnes, because their
father Bartosz is also organic.  However it seems most convenient to
classify Silja, Noah and Agnes as artificial characters because time
travel was necessary for Silja’s parents to meet. [#zomg]_

Hannah, Egon, Bartosz, Jana and Peter are all organic characters who
are parents of artificial children.


Motivations of the secret societies
-----------------------------------

Excepting only Jonas, who does not exist in world B, all of the
characters of *Dark* appers to have two versions: one from each world.
In each world, a secret society forms: Sic Mundus Creatus Est (Sic
Mundus for short) in world A, headed by the elder Jonas (taking on the
persona of Adam) and Erit Lux in world B, headed by the elder Martha
(taking on the persona of Eva, or Eve).  Most of the artificial
characters in each world who do not meet their ends in other ways are,
or they become, agents of these societies.  Eva and Erit Lux works
toward the goal of perpetuating the seemingly paradoxical cycle of
cause and effect, whereas Adam and Sic Mundus seeks to destroy it and
achieve a “paradise” of nothingness.

Understanding the motivation of the characters is key to understanding
*Dark*.  The cause-and-effect cycle seems to be self-perpetuating, but
many characters do what they do out of a false (or correct?) belief
that they can change events which they have seen (they can’t), that
they can finally end the cycle (they can), or that the cycle must be
endlessly perpetuated.  As *Dark* often tells us: we can choose what
we do, but we can’t choose what we *want*.  Understanding what
characters *want* is important.


Reading this chronology
-----------------------

Below you will find links to individual chronologies for each relevant
character and object.  The chronologies follow the lifetimes of a
character or an object from their birth or inception to their death or
destruction.  This is helpful to understand the motivations of each
individual, because it paints a picture of the world *as they see it*,
with the events that they have experienced.  The standard narrative of
*Dark* is often difficult to follow because it shows the events of
(for example) Jonas’ life out of order, leaving the viewer wondering
what really are the motivations of middle-aged Jonas, or what events
could have happened to bring them about.  It also does not help that
characters frequently lie and manipulate each other.

To distinguish different versions of each character or object from
each other, we will give them a subscript number that increases by one
each time they travel through time (or across worlds), so that, for
example, when Jonas is born he is Jonas\ :sub:`1`, and after his first
time travel he becomes Jonas\ :sub:`2`.  Characters from world B will
be indicated as such, for example Martha\ :sub:`b` or Martha\
:sub:`2b` after her first travel.  Since we spend most of our time in
world A, following the characters of that world, I will generally not
indicate them as such.  So Jonas is just Jonas, not Jonas\ :sub:`a`.

For characters that exist in different versions at the same time I
will be using subscripts c, d and so on.  There are not too many of
these, but when it happens it’s important to keep track of.


People
======

- :ref:`egon`
- :ref:`jonas`
- :ref:`hannah`
- :ref:`silja`


.. [#zomg] As adults, at any rate.


.. _Github: https://github.com/TheBB/Dark


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :caption: Contents:
   :hidden:

   people/egon
   people/jonas
   people/hannah
   people/silja
