.. _jonas:

Jonas Kahnwald
==============

Jonas is the son of :ref:`hannah` and Mikkel Nielsen.  He is the best
candidate to any sort of protagonist of *Dark*.  He begins his life in
the 2000s, being led to discover time travel after the suicide of his
father.  After the apocalypse of world A in 2020, his chronology
splits into three different lines.

Jonas\ :sub:`c` survives the apocalypse and grows to a middle-aged man
in post-apocalyptic Winden, trying to get time travel to work in the
destroyed nuclear plant, although the efforts are secretly sabotaged
by Claudia.  Upon finally returning to Winden he attempts to close the
passage.  Experiencing the apocalypse again, he escapes back to the
1890s together with a cadre of characters, where he begins forming the
nascent Sic Mundus and takes on the persona of Adam, aiming to end the
cycle by destroying the unborn nameless man.

Jonas\ :sub:`d` is rescued by Martha\ :sub:`b` and taken to world B,
where he sets into motion the necessary events to perpetuate the cycle
there.  In particular he sleeps with Martha, bringing the nameless man
into existence.  He is shot dead shortly thereafter by Martha.

Jonas\ :sub:`e` is rescued by Adam and taken to world B where he
intercepts the timeline of Martha, taking her to world Z where they
together successfully end the cycle.


Jonas\ :sub:`1`
---------------

On June 20, 2019, exactly one day before the opening of the passage,
Jonas is enjoying a nice day at the like together with Martha\
:sub:`1`, Magnus\ :sub:`1` and Bartosz\ :sub:`1`.  Bartosz tells a
story of a woman who drowned in the lake.  In fact, unbeknownst to
anyone, the dead body of Katharina is actually there.  In the sand,
Jonas finds a St. Christopher medal, where it was left after the
scuffle between Helene and Katharina.  Jonas must leave early, and he
leaves the medal behind.

Later that day, at Katharina’s birthday party, Jonas runs into Martha
who gives him the St. Christopher medal, now on a chain.  Martha is
acting very forward, because since the last time they met she ran into
Jonas\ :sub:`7`, believing him to be Jonas\ :sub:`1`.  They eventually
kiss and sleep together.

The next day, Jonas and his mother discover the suicide of Michael,
along with a suicide note which eventually passes to Ines, Jonas’
grandmother by adoption.  Over time, the relationship between Hannah
and Ines start deteriorating.  Jonas finds himself needing to take
time off school for therapy.

On November 4, his first day back in school, he goes to the caves
together with Martha, Magnus, Bartosz and Mikkel\ :sub:`1`.  They are
looking for Erik’s secret stash of drugs.  After this, Mikkel goes
missing, having been taken by Jonas\ :sub:`7` through the tunnel
to 1986.

The next day, Jonas discovers a map of the Winden caves hidden in his
late father’s studio.  On November 6 he enters the cave to explore,
but is unable to find the way.  That night, middle-aged Jonas\
:sub:`10c` sneaks into his bedroom to scribble a hint on the map.  The
next day he also meets Jonas\ :sub:`10c` at the graveyard, not knowing
who he is.  The elder Jonas says they don’t know each other, but that
Jonas’ father once saved his life (which he did, by committing
suicide).

Later that day, Jonas breaks a promise to Bartosz and instead of
joining him goes to see Martha’s theater practice.  He reveals to her
the fact about his absence from school, and they kiss again.  When he
comes home, he finds a package sent to him by Jonas\ :sub:`10c` with
cave exploration equipment and his father’s opened suicide note.  He
reads the note, which is addressed to him. On
November 8, armed with better tools and knowledge, he re-enters the
cave and successfully finds the tunnel, traveling to 1986 as Jonas\
:sub:`2`.
