.. _martha:

Martha Nielsen
==============

Martha Nielsen is the daughter of Ulrich and Katharina Nielsen.  In
world A she serves as the primary love interest of :ref:`jonas`, with
limited impact on the actual time travel plot until she dies in the
apocalypse of that world.

The various versions of Martha in world B serve a key role in the
perpetuation of the cycle, and the resolution thereof.  She is
launched on her path in November of 2019 by the arrival of Jonas\
:sub:`9d` from world A.  She sleeps with him and thereby conceives the
nameless man.  After Jonas is shot dead by her elder self, she teams
up with Bartosz\ :sub:`b` to try to stop the apocalypse, at which
point her chronology splits into three different lines.

Martha\ :sub:`c` is sent to world A to rescue Jonas from the
apocalypse, but is thereafter interrupted by Bartosz\ :sub:`b`, and
they travel back to the Erit Lux headquarters.  She is then
manipulated into the role of Eva by her elder self in order to save
the life of her child.

Martha\ :sub:`d` is also sent to world A to rescue Jonas, but is *not*
interrupted by Bartosz.  She then travels to 1888 in world A to give
the stranded Jonas\ :sub:`17c` the God particles he needs to build his
time travel device.  After that she travels to 2053, where she is
taken and eventually killed by Sic Mundus.

Martha\ :sub:`e` is intercepted by Jonas\ :sub:`9e` before even being
sent to world A.  Together they go to world Z where they successfully
end the cycle.


Martha\ :sub:`1b`
-----------------

We first see Martha\ :sub:`1b` as she awakes on November 4, 2019 in
the Kahnwald house of world B.  At school that day, she is approached
by Jonas\ :sub:`9d`, who has just been rescued from the apocalypse in
world A by her future self, but she doesn’t recognize him.

Later, under the bridge, Martha is again approached by Jonas before he
is chased away by her friends Magnus\ :sub:`1b`, Bartosz\ :sub:`1b`,
Franziska\ :sub:`1b` and Killian\ :sub:`1b`.  In the forest they get
scared and run away to the bunker where a wormhole develops.  The dead
body of Mads drops.

The next day, Jonas finally gains her attention by listing events from
her life that he couldn’t possibly know.  Intrigued, Martha follows
him through the tunnel to 2052, as Martha\ :sub:`2b`.


Martha\ :sub:`2b`
-----------------

In post-apocalyptic Winden version B, Martha and Jonas are instructed
by middle-aged Martha\ :sub:`b` that they must prevent the opening of
the barrels to avoid the apocalypse.  They then return to 2019,
becoming Martha\ :sub:`3b`.


Martha\ :sub:`3b`
-----------------

On the night of November 6, Martha\ :sub:`3b` sleeps with Jonas\
:sub:`11d`.  She becomes pregnant with the nameless man.

The next day, which is the day before the apocalypse, Martha and Jonas
break into the power plant.  When crossing the fence, Martha receives
a scratch under her eye: exactly the same scratch that he saw earlier
when rescued by the slightly older Martha in his own world.  Jonas
then realises he is not actually saving anyone, merely perpetuating
the cycle.

Together they go to the Erit Lux headquarters to confront Eva.  In
walks Martha\ :sub:`6d` who shoots and kills Jonas.  Before he dies,
he gives her his St. Christopher pendant. Devastated, Martha\
:sub:`3b` makes her way out and recruits the help of Bartosz\
:sub:`1b` to try to prevent the apocalypse.  However before that
happens, they are interrupted by middle-aged Magnus and Franziska from
world B.  They have an orb that they give her.  At this point,
Martha’s timeline splits in three.

In the first two cases she is sent to world A, at the time of the
apocalypse, having been told that Jonas can still be saved (which he
can… sort of).

- Once there, in one case, she is then stopped by Bartosz\ :sub:`b`
  who tells her that Jonas (in the form of Adam) does not truly intend
  to prevent the apocalypse.  They travel back to the Erit Lux
  headquarters in the far future of world B, Martha becoming Martha\
  :sub:`4c`.  It is this timeline that creates the persona of Eva
  (future Martha) and Adam (future Jonas).

- In the other case, Martha is not stopped by Bartosz and successfully
  rescues Jonas, bringing him to world B as Jonas\ :sub:`9d`.  This is
  the same Jonas that tried getting her attention only a few days
  earlier.  She then travels to world A in 1888 as Martha\
  :sub:`4d`. Although neither Jonas nor Martha live long in this
  timeline, they both set in motion key events for the perpetuation
  the cycle in each other’s worlds.

- In the third case, Martha is prevented from even traveling to world
  A in the first place as Jonas\ :sub:`9e` rugby-tackles her.  This
  Martha\ :sub:`4e` goes on to help end the cycle.



Martha\ :sub:`4d`
-----------------

Having successfully saved Jonas and brought him to world B, Martha
then travels to September 21, 1888 in world A.
