.. _noah:

Noah
====

Noah is the son of Bartosz and :ref:`Silja`, the brother of Agnes, and
the father of Charlotte.

Noah was born as Hanno Tauber in 1904.  He spent his formative years
being indoctrinated in the growing cult of Sic Mundus by Adam
(Jonas-C), where he built the time travel tunnel in the Winden caves
together with his father Bartosz, whom he would eventually kill.

After being sent to the time of the apocalypse to set the middle-aged
Jonas on his path to becoming Adam, he takes refuge in the bunker.  In
post-apocalyptic Winden, he joins younger Jonas-C and Claudia in their
work on the God-particle.  He falls in love with Elisabeth and have a
child, Charlotte, who is abducted in 2041.  He then leaves, vowing to
Elisabeth to find their child, believing Claudia to be behind it.
This becomes his primary motivation from this point.

We next see him in 1920, having traveled by unknown means, bringing
with him the leather notebook which he obtained from Elisabeth.  Adam
convinces him that Claudia is at fault and that the answer can be
found in the missing pages of the notebook.

From this point, Noah makes several time travel trips, probably using
the portable time machine that has been with Sic Mundus for decades.
He establishes himself as the pastor of Winden. Noah also rescues the
missing Helge from the bunker in 1986 and thereby earns his trust,
using it to make the middle-aged Helge aid him in his experiments with
the chair.

Finally, when Agnes reappears promising to deliver Claudia to him, he
jumps at the chance, finally obtaining the missing pages and learning
the fate of Charlotte.  After briefly visiting her in 2020, he returns
to confront Adam, who has been using him as a pawn, only to be killed
by his sister.


Noah-1
------

Noah is born in 1904 to Silja and Bartosz.  He is named Hanno Tauber.
Adam begins to manipulate him from childbirth, giving him the name
Noah.

In 1920, Noah is working at the inn in Winden, where he briefly meets
his older self Noah-3 having returned from post-apocalyptic Winden.

Young Noah can also be seen on the photo of the members of Sic Mundus,
which is dated to January 8 of 1921.

On June 21, 1921, while digging the tunnel in the caves, Bartosz
admits to Noah that he has lost faith in their mission.  Now
thoroughly under the thumb of Adam, Noah kills his own father.  Later
that day, Noah-4 comforts his younger self who has taken his "first
step".

On June 24, Noah helps introduce Jonas-6, who has recently arrived
from post-apocalyptic Winden, to the Sic Mundus cult and Adam.

Three days later, Noah is finally ready for his first time travel
mission.  He leaves for 2020, bringing with him the letter written by
Martha-C (Eva), with instructions to give it to Jonas-16C so that he
will travel with Magnus, Franziska and Bartosz to 1888, thereby taking
his final step towards becoming Adam.


Noah-2
------

On June 27, 2020, Noah-2 walks in on Jonas-16C in the Kahnwald house
and gives him the letter.  Everything works as expected.  Noah then
makes his way to the bunker, where he first meets his future love,
Elisabeth.

In the immediate aftermath after the disaster, Noah takes to living in
the caves, working to clear the rubble for the tunnel, which he knows
so well.  He makes initial moves towards Elisabeth, but is rebuffed
by her father Peter, who distrusts him.

On September 23, after Peter dies in an attack, Noah takes Elisabeth
under his wing, and begins indoctrinating her in the cult as well.
She begins believing in paradise.

In 2023, Noah interrupts Jonas-9 in his suicide attempt, demonstrating
the futility of trying to change events.  He shows him the passage
which they have cleared.  Apparently Noah believes they will be saved
by Adam.

Noah and Elisabeth then join Jonas and Claudia, trying to make the God
particle mass work.  Noah becomes frustrated and believes, correctly,
that Claudia is sabotaging the work.  However, he fails to drive a
wedge between Jonas and Claudia.

In 2040 or 2041, Elisabeth gives birth to their daughter, who they
name Charlotte.  Shortly thereafter, she is abducted by the older
Elisabeth and Charlotte herself traveling through time from about 10
years or so in the future, on orders from Adam.  Noah, however,
believes he has been betrayed by Jonas and Claudia.  He says goodbye
to Elisabeth, taking with him the leather notebook, vowing to find
Charlotte.

He is next seen in 1920, having traveled there by unknown means.  It
seems most likely that the intervening years was spent in
post-apocalyptic Winden, and that he was able to use the God-particle
mass not long after Claudia and Jonas was able to make it work and
travel to 2019.


Noah-3
------

In 1920, Noah returns to Adam and confronts him about Charlotte's
disappearance.  Adam says, truly, that he did not do it (although his
future self orchestrated it), and successfully turns Noah's suspicion
towards Claudia, tasking him with finding the missing pages from the
notebook.

Somewhere around this time, Noah is installed as the local priest of
Winden under his birth name of Hanno Tauber.

At this point Noah begins the main activities which we see him perform
in seasons 1 and 2.  It is likely that he manages this extensive time
travel using the portable time machine, which he probably obtains at
this point from Sic Mundus, where it has been out of use since 1888
without fuel.  It's not immediately clear where the fuel came from,
but Noah may have brought it from 2052.

Noah time travels a lot, and it's usually not shown to us when he
does.  However, assuming that he always travels in intervals of 33
years, we can surmise that the events shown of adult Noah in seasons 1
and 2 are at least shown in chronological order according to Noah's
own consciousness.


Noah-4
------

On October 9, 1986 Mads is abducted, probably taken by Helge-3 and
Noah-4.  He is kept in the bunker for almost a month, then dies while
time traveling to November 4, 2019 in the defective chair.


Noah-5
------

On November 6, 2019 Noah finds the young Elisabeth and gives her a
pocketwatch with Charlotte's name.


Noah-6
------

On November 7, 1986 Noah is in the hospital discussing the nature of
God with Mikkel-2.


Noah-7
------

Later that day, Noah is certainly in 2019 as Yasin is kidnapped.  He
places a call to Bartosz using Erik's phone, and later meets up with
him.  He tells Bartosz a few details about the future to earn his
trust.


Noah-8
------

On November 9, 1953, Noah is working in the bunker cleaning up
blood.  It's probably that of Yasin, and we may surmise that Erik met
a similar fate only four days earlier.

The next day the two dead boys are found at the nuclear power plant
construction site.  Greta (Helge's mother) later confesses that she
never wanted the boy, and that Bernd may not even be his real
father.  (Who is the other candidate?)


Noah-9
------

While at work in the bunker with Helge, Noah successfully silences
Helge's misgivings and manages to get him to continue the work.  They
have one more target in mind: Jonas.


Noah-10
-------

On November 11, 2019 Noah again meets Bartosz.  Everything that was
predicted has come true and Bartosz appears to be cooperative.


Noah-11
-------

On November 12, 1986 Noah and Helge abduct Jonas when he arrives at
the hospital to help Mikkel back to 2019.  They lock him in the
bunker.  Later that night, the young Helge-2 is transplanted into 1986
from 1953.  Noah must begin to take care of him at this point, earning
his trust, which he has already made such heavy use of, and presumably
this ends the experiments with the chair.


Noah-12
-------

Later that day, in 2019, Noah explains the nature of "light and
shadow" to Bartosz, and that they belong to the light.


Noah-13
-------

On January 8, 1921 Noah is certainly back in the 20s for the
photograph together with the rest of the members of Sic Mundus.

Next we see him is on June 21, where he comforts his younger self
after the murder of Bartosz.  However, Noah has probably continued to
travel in the meantime.  The young Helge is still stuck in 1986 in
Noah's care.


Noah-14
-------

On June 21, 2020 Noah meets the younger Bartosz, and together they
enter the cave.  It is possible that this is Bartosz' first time
travel, and that he now learns how to use the machine.


Noah-15
-------

On June 22, 1987 Noah is present outside the Winden caves when Mikkel
goes there, and instructs him to stay away.


Noah-16
-------

On June 23, 1987 Noah finally sends Helge-3 back to 1954 and then
follows after him.  He is able, as seemingly the only person, to make
Helge speak.

Later that day, Agnes shows up in the church, apparently wanting to
return to the good graces of Sic Mundus.  She shows him a newspaper
clipping describing the place and date of Claudia's death.  Noah goes
to do the deed, finally obtaining the missing pages from the notebook.
He reads about his daughter and cannot believe what he sees.

This is the last we see of Noah in the 50s timeline.  We later see
reports that the priest of Winden has gone missing.  At this point,
Noah's time machine probably passes to Bartosz.


Noah-17
-------

Back in 1921, Noah tells Adam about Claudia's death, but does not
reveal to him that he has the missing pages.  Noah's faith in Adam is
slipping.

Noah is still at the Sic Mundus headquarters when Jonas-6 arrives from
post-apocalyptic Winden on June 24.


Noah-18
-------

On June 25 Noah is in 2020, catching a glimpse of Elisabeth,
Franziska, Magnus and Martha, as they bring the time machine back to
the cave where Bartosz is tied up.  It's not clear how Noah came to be
here, now that he no longer has the machine.  He could have traveled
using the Sic Mundus swirling vortex, which would indicate that it's
still active in 2020 to allow travel back to 1921.


Noah-19
-------

On June 27, 1921 Noah finally confronts Adam about his manipulation,
throwing at him the missing notebook pages.  He tries to kill Adam but
fails as the gun misfires.  Instead, Agnes uses the same weapon to
shoot and kill Noah.
